---
categories:
 - grading
 - policy
---

### Grading Rubric

#### For all assignments

In assessing students' work, the instructor will focus on the following factors applicable to all assignments (specific criteria for each assignment will be detailed later):

- Process: Were the drafts iterated and improved based on faculty feedback?
- Quality: Is it executed with skill and subtlety, and has it been edited well and polished?
- Organization and Presentation: Is it presented clearly and in a professional manner suitable for the target audience?
- Effort: Has the work been prepared with careful thought and attention to detail?
- Punctuality a Completeness: Is it on time and complete, and does it fulfill the assignment?

#### For Discussions

- Preparedness: Has the student completed the work necessary in preparation for the discussion?
- Participation: Was the student engaged in the discussion (both paying attention and participating)?

#### For In-class Exercises

- Effort: Did the student try to complete the exercise to better understand the lesson at hand?
- Participation: If the exercise involves collaboration, did the student contribute?

### Assignment Values

#### Grading model

{% include grading.md %}

#### Assignments Grade Overall

Your grade is based on your performance during the semester. It includes readings, participation and hands-on tutorials in class (that means you must attend all classes), as well as a final project assignments, broken down as follows.

{% include assignment-weight.md %}
